---
author: Krzysztof Wujs
pubDatetime: 2024-08-20T15:22:00Z
modDatetime: 2024-08-20T18:12:47.400Z
title: My thoughts about social media, why we need SSI and decentralised social networks
slug: my-thoughts-on-social-networks-ssi-and-how-blockchain-can-help
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - SSI
  - Data Privacy
  - Web3
description:
  Explore how self-sovereign identity and decentralized platforms empower users and protect privacy in social networks.
---

## Introduction

I've been a Linkedin user since 2014, building a network of over 2000 connections based on colleagues, industry experts and potential business partners. But over time, I began to question the true value of this vast network, because in my opinion - after long observation - your network isn't your net worth. LinkedIn's evolution pushed me to connect with everyone, resulting in a feed cluttered with irrelevant content, trivial memes and shallow business advice.

I was tired of the noise, so I cleaned up my network. I deleted 1,100 connections, keeping only the ones that mattered. LinkedIn even suspended me for a few days, suspecting I was using a third-party tool to delete connections in bulk. The irony? I was doing it all manually! All I can say is that it took a lot of time, but I am glad that I can now take control of the people in my network. My advice to Linkedin product team, is to make better tools for managing connections.

Linkedin is failing its users. Subscription services like Sales Navigator and Career Plan are no longer valuable, and new features like Catch Up are useless. As someone with a background in product development, I'm baffled by how Linkedin has become so underwhelming, and the lack of real alternatives is frustrating.

This led me to reflect on the broader impact of centralised platforms. It's clear that they prioritise quantity over quality and control over user empowerment. The future is decentralised social networks and concepts like Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI). These innovations shift control back to users, and they will transform how we experience the digital world.

## The Need for Change: From Centralised to Decentralised Social Networks

Centralised social networks like Linkedin, Facebook, and Twitter operate under a model where a single entity controls the platform, including user data. This centralisation allows these platforms to dictate terms, manage user interactions, and monetise data through targeted advertising—often at the expense of user privacy and autonomy. There are significant risks: data breaches, censorship, and the exploitation of user information without explicit consent.

Linkedin offers convenience in maintaining professional connections but also wields substantial control over user data, leading to potential censorship or data exploitation. These platforms prioritise data monetisation over user experience, resulting in aggressive data collection and the promotion of low-quality content through engagement-driven algorithms.

In contrast,  decentralised social networks (DSNs) distribute control across a network, often using blockchain technology. This decentralised model ensures that no single entity can monopolise the platform. It gives users ownership of their data and enhances privacy and security. It also makes censorship and data manipulation much harder. Users can control their digital interactions.

The shift from centralised to decentralised social networks isn't just technological – it's a fundamental rethink of the user-platform relationship. In a decentralised model, users become active stakeholders, controlling their digital identities and interactions, addressing many issues of centralised networks, and offering a more equitable, user-centric online experience.

## Understanding Decentralised Identity and the Role of SSI

The transition to decentralised social networks is directly linked to the concept of decentralised identity (DID). Traditional centralised identity systems, managed by entities like companies or governments, control users' identity information. This model is convenient but flawed. It is vulnerable to data breaches, gives users limited control, and fragments across different platforms. Users juggle multiple accounts and passwords with little control over how their data is used or shared.

A common example of centralised identity management is Single Sign-On (SSO). In this system, users can access multiple services with one set of credentials, typically managed by a central provider like Google or Facebook. Although SSO simplifies the login process, it centralises control, increasing risk. If an SSO account is compromised, all linked services are exposed.

Decentralised identity models shift control to users, enabling them to manage their identity data across a network of peer-to-peer connections. Supported by blockchain technology, these models use public/private key cryptography to secure information, empowering users to decide who can access their data and under what conditions. This marks a significant departure from traditional models, where users have minimal control once their data is handed over to a service provider.

Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) is the future. It allows individuals to own and manage their digital identities without relying on a central authority. SSI is the solution to the problems of linking connections through centralised platforms like Linkedin, where data is controlled by the platform. SSI enables direct, peer-to-peer exchanges. For example, two professionals can securely share digital credentials directly through their devices, maintaining full control over the interaction and protecting their data from being stored on centralised servers.

SSI's verifiable credentials allow users to prove aspects of their identity (such as age, education, or professional qualifications) without unnecessary data exposure. By sharing only the information necessary for a specific interaction, users can enhance their privacy and security in an era of frequent data breaches.

## The Future of Social Networks: Privacy, Freedom, and User Empowerment

The shift from centralised to decentralised social networks is not just a technological change. It is a fundamental rethinking of how we manage our digital lives. Decentralised social networks, supported by technologies like SSI, offer unparalleled advantages in terms of privacy, freedom, and user empowerment. In today's digital landscape, where centralized platforms often prioritize their interests over those of their users, these benefits are more crucial than ever.

### Privacy and Security

Decentralised social networks store user data in a distributed manner, often encrypted, and only authorised individuals can access it. This is a stark contrast to centralised networks, where user data is stored on centralised servers that are vulnerable to breaches and unauthorised access. By distributing data across multiple nodes, DSNs eliminate the risk of a single point of failure, enhancing overall security.

SSI further strengthens privacy by allowing users to selectively disclose information. Instead of sharing all their personal details with a service provider, users can choose to reveal only what is necessary for a specific interaction. This approach minimises exposure and reduces the risks associated with data breaches and unauthorised surveillance, common in centralised networks.

### Censorship Resistance

DSNs are resistant to censorship, which is one of their most significant advantages. In centralised networks, content can and will be removed or suppressed at the discretion of the platform's owners, often in response to pressure from governments or other powerful entities. Centralised control inevitably leads to the suppression of free speech and the marginalisation of dissenting voices.

DSNs, on the other hand, have no central point of control where content can be arbitrarily removed or suppressed. Their decentralised nature ensures that content remains accessible, even if it is controversial or goes against the prevailing narrative. This resistance to censorship is crucial for safeguarding free speech and ensuring that diverse viewpoints can be shared without fear of suppression.

### User Empowerment and Data Portability

SSI gives users complete control of their digital identities, ensuring they are not locked into a single platform. In centralised networks, users are often tied to a platform's terms and services, with limited ability to move their data or connections elsewhere. This lack of portability is frustrating and disempowering. It effectively holds users hostage by forcing them to comply with the platform's policies.

Decentralised social networks are the future. They allow users to take their data and connections with them as they move between platforms. This data portability is a key aspect of user empowerment, as it gives individuals greater control over their digital lives. With SSI, users can confidently move their data and connections across different DSNs without losing control over their identity or compromising their privacy.

### Scalability and Resilience

DSNs are perfectly positioned to scale more effectively as they grow. Each user contributes to the network's resources, such as storage and bandwidth, which allows the network to grow without any issues. This decentralised infrastructure is also more resilient because it simply does not have a single point of failure that could disrupt the entire network. A server outage or cyberattack can bring a centralised network down. We've seen this with numerous high-profile incidents.

A decentralised network is more resilient. Even if one node goes down, the rest of the network remains operational. This is particularly important as social networks become increasingly critical to our daily lives. They serve as platforms for communication, collaboration, and community building.
## Challenges and the Path Forward

DSNs offer clear benefits, but there are challenges that must be addressed to achieve widespread adoption. These include usability, data portability and the need for robust incentive structures.

### Usability

The main barrier to the adoption of DSNs is usability. It is undeniable that decentralized platforms and SSI technologies are more complex to use than traditional social networks, which are designed with user convenience in mind. The average user will find the process of managing private keys, understanding decentralised identities and navigating peer-to-peer connections daunting.

To overcome this barrier, developers must focus on improving the user experience and making these technologies more accessible. This will require the creation of user-friendly interfaces, clear guidance on how to use decentralised features, and education on the benefits of decentralisation. As these technologies mature, we can expect to see a growing number of tools and services designed to simplify the user experience.

### Data Portability and Interoperability

To achieve this level of interoperability, we must develop common standards and protocols that all DSNs can adhere to. This will foster a more unified and user-friendly decentralised web. These standards will allow users to move seamlessly between different platforms without losing access to their data or connections. This ensures that the decentralised experience is as smooth and convenient as that of traditional centralised networks.

### Incentives for Participation

DSNs will only thrive if users are actively involved in maintaining the network's infrastructure and ensuring its continued growth. In a centralised network, the platform owner provides the necessary resources to sustain the network, including servers, storage and maintenance. In a decentralised model, these responsibilities are distributed across the network's participants.

It is essential to create incentive structures that encourage users to contribute resources like storage, computational power, and content for the sustainability of these networks. This might include mechanisms such as token rewards, reputation systems, or other forms of compensation that recognise and reward active participation. These incentives are vital for maintaining the infrastructure and fostering a vibrant and engaged community that drives the network's growth and evolution.

## Conclusion

The shift from centralised to decentralised social networks is not just a technological change. It is a fundamental rethink of how we interact and control our digital lives. As traditional platforms like Linkedin, Facebook, and others continue to prioritise their control over user autonomy, it is clear that the appeal of decentralised alternatives is growing stronger. These networks, powered by cutting-edge technologies like Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI), will usher in a future where users fully control their data, maintain their privacy, and interact without the fear of censorship or exploitation.

However, the road to widespread adoption of decentralised social networks (DSNs) is challenging. Usability, data portability and the need for robust incentive structures must be addressed. These challenges are not insurmountable. As awareness grows and technology continues to mature, the potential benefits of DSNs – enhanced privacy, greater user control, and a more resilient and censorship-resistant internet – make them an increasingly viable alternative to their centralised counterparts.

Embracing decentralised social networks is the only way to build a fairer digital world. It's time to distribute power and empower individuals to take control of their online identities and interactions. Privacy, freedom and user-centric platforms are in demand, and the future of social networks is decentralised. It's the only way to build a more secure, private and user-empowered online experience.

## References

For those interested in exploring the topics discussed further, here are some valuable references and resources:

- [**The Future of Social Networking: Decentralisation for User Empowerment, Privacy, and Freedom**](https://medium.com/paradigm-research/the-future-of-social-networking-decentralization-for-user-empowerment-privacy-and-freedom-from-a0a8f74790cb): An insightful article that explores the potential of decentralized social networks to revolutionize user empowerment and data privacy.
- [**Self-Sovereign Identity: Decentralized Digital Identity and Verifiable Credentials**](https://www.manning.com/books/self-sovereign-identity): A comprehensive book that delves into the principles and technologies behind self-sovereign identity, a cornerstone of Web 3.0.
- [**What are Decentralized Social Networks?**](https://sopa.tulane.edu/blog/decentralized-social-networks#:~:text=What%20are%20Decentralized%20Social%): An article that breaks down the fundamentals of decentralized social networks and their impact on online interactions.
- [**Decentralized Social Networks: The Future of Social Media?**](https://www.coindesk.com/learn/decentralized-social-networks-the-future-of-social-media/): This article from CoinDesk provides an overview of decentralized social networks, their benefits, and how they differ from traditional social media platforms.
- [**Web3 and the Decentralized Web: An Introduction**](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2022/01/28/web3-and-the-decentralized-web-an-introduction/?sh=4b64d6d7721c): A useful introduction to Web3 and how it underpins the decentralized web, which is changing the way we think about ownership, privacy, and control in the digital world.
- [**A Brief History of the Future: Decentralized Social Media**](https://www.wired.co.uk/article/decentralized-social-networks-web3): An article from Wired that looks into the history and future potential of decentralized social media networks.
